Hi, I'm Sergei Sav and
we're starting session two of the second
week of Operations and Litics course.
In session one,
we have looked at the Zooter example,
a resource allocation problem
in which limited resources
must be allocated among two competing
products in the most profitable way.
We have identified the three main
components of the optimization model.
Decision variables,
an objective function, and constraints.
We have also written down an algebraic
formulation of this other problem.
In this session, we'll create a
spreadsheet formulation of the model, and
find the best decision using
the Solver Optimization tool.
Okay, in session two,
we will take an algebraic model
we put together in session one.
Express it in the spreadsheet terms,
and we'll use Solver to optimize it.
As a reminder, here's the algebraic
model of the Zooter problem.
We have the decision variables, R,
the number of razor scooters to produce,
and N, the number of scooters to produce.
The objective function which is the
profit, 150 x R + 160 x N, that we want
to maximize any constraints on available
resources and on our decision variables.
As I mentioned Solver will
be our weapon of choice.
So what is Solver?
Solver is a standard
Excel editing Windows and
it is available on later
versions of Excel for Mac.
If you use Mac, we have a link
that explains the details for you.
If you use Google Sheets,
a version of the Solver is
available as the so-called add-on.
Okay, this is my Excel template Zooter_0.
It is posted on our site,
so you can open it now and
follow the steps I'm going through.
Here in the zero version,
we have put in the problem data,
and also pasted in a copy of
the algebraic model so it'll be easier
to make comparisons between the algebraic
and the spreadsheet formulations.
We will do the model step by step and
then we will use the solver to find
the best production plan for Zooter.
To go over this example, we will use
Excel 2013 on the Windows platform.
If you're using Mac or
Google Sheets instead,
you should still look at the steps
we're following here first.
Before we build the model,
let's figure out where to find the Solver.
The Solver's is called Excel add in.
We're not in Excel 2013 and in this
version of Excel, the Solver's located
under the tab called Data in
the portion of the tab called Analysis.
Here's my Solver button.
If your setup is just like mine and
you see the silver button there,
you're good to go.
If you do not see the silver button,
then you should go to
File > Options > Add Ins.
And here at the bottom where it says
Manage Excel Add Ins, you click Go,
and you wanna make sure that
the Solver Add In is checked.
You click OK, and the Solver should
appear here on the Data tab.
In the early versions of Excel, the steps
you need to take may be different but
in any case just keep in mind
the Solver is an Excel add in.
Find where the add ins are in
your version of Excel and
make sure that the Solver is selected.
Okay we're now ready to set up our model.
For this first example we will proceed in
a very detailed manner to make sure that
we cover every important
aspect of the model setup, and
of the solver functionality.
Now we need to translate our algebraic
model into a spreadsheet formulation.
In other words,
we need to describe on the spreadsheet
three key components of
an optimization model.
Decision variables,
an objective function, and constraints.
Let's start with the decision variables.
In the Zooter problem we have two
products, Razor and Navajo scooters.
So let's create cells that
will hold the values for
each type of scooter to be produced.
Let's say we select cell C10 and
D10 for this purpose.
C10 will hold the value of the number
of Razor scooters to be produced,
that is the value of
the decision variable R.
And D10 will be reserved for
the number of Navajo scooters.
That is,
the value of the decision variable N.
Let us put the header in cell A10,
units to make,
and let's add some trial
values In cells C10 and
T10 to make sure that
those cells are not empty.
Say let's consider producing
500 units of each scooter type.
One last thing, let's highlight
the decision variable cells by
using the blue color and bold font,
and by putting a frame around them.
[SOUND] Of course whether
you do this embellishment or
not is completely up to you.
It will not effect the optimization but
if you do,
the decision variables will be
easily recognizable as soon as
the Excel file is opened and this will
make you're file easier to navigate.
We have to find results to hold
our decision variable values.
Later, we'll point the cells out to
Solver and ask the Solver to chang
the values in cell C10 and D10 to identify
the best possible production plan.
Okay, we're done with the decision
variables and are now ready for
the objective function.
The objective in this
model is the total profit.
So we should be able to calculate how
much profit Zooter will be making for
any values of the decision variables.
Now, let's calculate and
record the profit value
corresponding to our production
plan of 500 units of each model.
Let's select the cell F10 to hold
the value of the objective function,
that is the total profit value.
In the cell F10 we will
be writing a formula
that calculates the value
of the total profit.
We'll start with the equality sign to tell
Excel that we have a formula in this cell.
Now, for each of 500 Razor scooters,
Zooter gets $150.00.
So we multiply 150 by 500.
And to that value we must add the profit
earned from the Navajo scooters.
That is 160 x 500.
So the total is $155,000.
So we have a formula for
the objective function cell.
This formula will calculate
the total profit value for
any choice of the decision variables.
For example,
if we try a production plan of say,
600 units of Razors, and
600 units of Navajos.
The number in F10 immediately changes
to reflect the new profit value.
So let's go back and
change it to 500 and 500.
By the way, if you would like to see
the formula inside a particular cell or
edit that formula you can
use a Windows shortcut F2.
So we are in cell F10 and here we see
the formula for the objective function.
In this problem we have
two decision variables.
And the calculation of the profit
value involves studying two products.
The product of the number of Razor
scooters and the profit contribution for
each Razor scooter and the product
of the number of Navajo scooters and
the profit contribution for
each Navajo scooter.
But what if our problem contained
1,000 of decision variables,
do we still have to write the profit
formula as a sum of 1,000 of products,
one for each decision variable?
Fortunately not.
The Excel function sum product
allows us to use a kind of
shorthand notation in such cases.
Here's how the sum product works for
the case of two scooter models.
We are in the cell left hand.
And let's replace the current
profit formula by its
equivalent using some product function.
So we type SUMPRODUCT Of, C9 and
D9 are profit contributions.
And C10 and D10 are decision variables.
The sum product function uses two
areas of cells of equal size.
And multiplies the numbers in the first
area by the corresponding numbers in
the second area.
First number in the first array is
multiplied by the first number in
the second array.
Second number in the first array is
multiplied by the second number in
the second array, and so on.
After that the SUMPRODUCT simply
sums all of these products.
So, the formula SUMPRODUCT C9:D9,
C10:D10 is exactly the same
as the formula C9 x C10, + D9, x D10,
and you'll get the same optimization
result no matter which one you use.
However, the sum product formula is
a lot more convenient when working with
the models with large numbers of variables
and large numbers of constraints.
You can find more information about the
sum product function in the Excel Help.
Okay, one last thing about
the objective function cell.
Just like we did for
the decision variable cells,,
let's highlight the objective function
cell to make sure it stands out visually.
Let's change the font color to red and
make the font bold.
So we're going to change the color to red,
And put the thick border.
Now every time we open the file, we see
the decision variable cells in blue and
the objective function cell in red.
So those cells have visually
distinguishable from other cells.
Later on we will instruct the solver
to change the values in our blue cells,
C10 and D10, our decision variable values,
to maximize the value in the red cell F10,
our objective function value.
Of course, we can not just use
any values in the blue cells, but
only those who require more resources
to produce, than what we have.
Now that we're done with the decision
variables in the objective function,
it is time to move on to the constraints.
The main constraints in our model
express the limited developability of
free production resources.
Frame manufacturing hours,
wheel and deck assembly hours, and
QA and packaging hours.
Let's look first at the frame
manufacturing hours.
We need to make sure that whatever
production plan we consider,
the number of frame manufacturing
hours used by this plan
does not exceed the number of frame
manufacturing hours available.
In the algebraic formulation, the number
of frame manufacturing hours used by
a production plan described
by decision variables are NN,
is equal to 4*R + 5*N,
and the number of available hours is 5610.
In our spreadsheet formulation,
cell G14 holds
the value of number of frame
manufacturing hours available 5610.
Let us use the cell E14,
to calculate the number of
frame manufacturing hours required by
the production plan in cells C10 and D10.
For convenience, let us put the header
Required (hours) in cell E13, above E14.
Okay, we have two more constraints to
convert into a spreadsheet format.
The constraint on the number of wheels and
deck assembly hours and
the constraint on the number of Q&A and
packaging hours.
If you look at the algebraic formulation
of each of those constraints, you
will notice that both have a very similar
structure to that of the constraint we
already dealt with, the constraint on
the number of frame manufacturing hours.
All three constraints have the full
instructure, expression on the left-hand
side of the constraint, the number of
required hours, cannot exceed the number
on the right-hand side of the constraint,
the number of available hours.
Let's go to the cell E15 and
put in the formula that will
calculate the number of wheels and
deck assembly hours required for any pair
of decision variables in cell C10 and D10.
Just like in the similar calculation for
the number of required frame manufacturing
hours, we need to multiply each decision
variable by the number of wheels and deck
assembly hours that a respective scooter
model uses and add the resulting products.
In other words,
the formula that we put in the cell
E15 is =SUMPRODUCT(C10:D10,C15:D15).
For the production plan
we're currently considering,
500 scooters of each scooter model,
we have the number of required wheels and
deck manufacturing hours as 1750.
Similarly, if we use cell E16 to
calculate the number of Q&A and
packaging hours required by
the production plan in cells C10 and D10,
we will put in the formula =SUMPRODUCT,
(C10:D10, C16:D16).
As we see, the current production plan
we're considering requires 900 hours of
this resource.
Okay, but what if we have thousands of
different resources to keep track of?
Do we have to keep going into cells
in the E column one by one and
type the sum product formula?
Fortunately, Excel provides a way
of avoiding this by using copy and
paste and the so-called absolute
cell referencing or cell anchoring.
Let's compare the formula in the cell
E14 to the formulas in the cells E15 and
E16 one more time.
All three formulas use the SUMPRODUCT of
the decision variable cells, C10 and D10.
Here's the formula in the cell E14.
And the consumption amounts
of each respective resource.
C14 and D14 for this cell E14.
C15 and D15 for the cell E15.
And C16 and D16 for the cell E16.
So if we would take a formula
in the cell E14 and
copy and paste it into the cells E15 and
E16, we would need to instruct
Excel to leave C10 and
D10 unchanged during this copy and
paste operation, and
to change C14 and D14 into C15 and
D15 and into C16 and D16.
The way to accomplish this is to use
the absolute cell referencing, or
cell anchoring, for the cells C10 and
D10 before doing the regular
Excel copy and paste operation.
Here's how we accomplish this.
We go into the cell E14,
we highlight cells C10 and D10,
and we use a Windows shortcut,
F4 to put the dollar signs
around the addresses for
sales C10 and D10.
Those dollar signs instruct Excel not
to change the addresses of the cells
when doing copy and paste.
If I now just copy and
paste the formula in E14 into E15 and
E16, I get the correct
formulas in those cells.
So, I am doing copy and paste.
For example if I now look at the cell E16,
I see the formula =SUMPRODUCT(C10:D10,
C16:D16) and that is the correct formula.
Clearly using this anchoring technique,
I can simply type a formula for
the resource consumption of one resource
And curve what ever cells I want,
in this case decision variable cells.
And then just copy and
paste the formula to
all cells that calculate consumption
amounts of all other resources.
And it does not really matter
if I have hundreds of those.
I can still do it all in one copy and
paste operation.
You can learn more about the absolute
cell referencing using Excel Help.
Let's also use a visual cue to indicate
that what we want in the optimization,
is that the values in the cells E14,
E15, and E16, to be less than or
equal to the values in the cells G14,
G15, and G16.
So we put less or equal signs here.
This is just a visual embellishment
to make sure that we can
read our file in an easy manner.
Okay, we have created cells that hold
values of the decision variables.
The objective function and
the resource consumption values.
How will we go about finding
the best production plan?
In short, we want to find the values
in the cells C0 and D10, our decision
variable cells, that make the value in
the cell F10, our objective function cell,
as large as possible while making
sure that the values in E14, E15, and
E16 do not exceed the values in G14,
G15, and G16, respectively.
Those are resource constraints.
For example if we produce
500 units of each model,
we earn the profit of
$155,000 as Excel tells us.
And all of our resource consumption
values stay within allowable ranges.
Well, can we make more money
by increasing the production?
Let's try producing 500 Razor scooters.
That's 750 Navajo scooters.
Our profit jumps to $195,000 but
unfortunately we ran out of
frame manufacturing and wheels and
deck assembly resources.
So we cannot simply implement
this production plan.
Now, let's tone it down to say,
600 Navajo scooters, so
our profit goes down to $171,000,
and our required number of hours
stay within the allowable limits.
So we can keep checking different
values of decision variables,
trying to improve the profit while
staying within the resource limits.
The problem is,
if we're trying to do it manually,
then we spend a tremendous amount of
time checking out various possibilities.
And even then we might not
find the best production plan,
especially if we have to deal
with many decision variables.
This is where the solver comes in.
It would be impossible any human to
check all possible alternatives,
just because there could be so
many of those alternatives.
The solver, though, does a much faster,
and much more through job
of checking those alternatives in
trying to come up with the best.
So let's bring in a solver.
Let's go to Data, click on Solver.
The solver parameter's dialog comes
up here in the set objective part.
We click on the cell selection tool and
choose the cell F10 to
represent our objective.
As you can see, the solver can maximize or
minimize the objective.
Minimization could be helpful if you are
dealing with minimization of the cost, or
it could select a values
of decision variables to
produce a desired value of
the objective function.
In a scooter problem we maximize profits,
so recheck max option.
Next, we use by changing variable cells to
specify where our decision variables are.
So we use the cell selection tool again to
point to the cells C10 and D10, and we go
back and we see that Excel now understands
where our decision variables are.
Finally, we need to specify to
sole where the constraints are.
We use Subject to Constraints,
a part, and click Add.
The dialog Add Constraint appears.
In this dialogue,
we use Cell Reference to select cells E14,
E15, and E16 on the left-hand
side of the constraint.
We also use constraint part
to select the values G14,
G15, and G16 on the right-hand
side of that constraint.
So, now we instructing this over to
make sure that E14 does not exceed G14,
E15 does not exceed G15, and
E16 does not exceed G16.
Know that we can also specify
constraint of equal type or
greater equal type, and
there are other choices here.
We'll use one of them later.
So let's select our less or
equal than sign.
Let's click OK.
And we see that this constraint is added.
What is left is adding constraints
that tell the solver that our decision
variables must be integer and
non-negative.
Let's add the integer constraint first.
We can click on Add, select our
decision variable, C10 and D10, and
then in the drop down menu select
INT options, which means integer.
So now when we click OK,
the Excel solver understands that
it must only use integer
values in the cells C10 and
D10 when it searches for
the best production plant.
Okay, the last constraint is
a non-negativity constraint and
the solver offers a convenient way
of introducing this constraint for
all decision variables at the same time.
All we need to do is to check the box make
all unconstrained variables non-negative.
Next we need to select a solving method.
Solver offers several choices here
with a default being GRG Nonlinear.
One of the choices is LP Simplex.
This is a solving method that can only be
applied to linear models, in other words,
the models where
the objective function and
the constraints are linear
functions of decision variables.
So if you are sure that your
model is built as a linear model,
use this option since it solves
linear models very efficiently.
If your model is not linear however, and
you're trying to use the LP Simplex
option, the solver will complain.
Now in this discussion I would like to
focus on the details of the modeling
process rather than on distinctions
between linear and nonlinear models.
So I would leave the solving
method at GRG Nonlinear.
This solution method is very general and
will allow you to work with
many different kinds of models,
both linear and nonlinear.
And a word of caution, if you select the
GRG nonlinear method, you do not have to
worry about whether your model is linear
or nonlinear, which is the good thing.
Since it is a general method of
solving optimization problems,
it will try to find the solution for
any model that you formulate.
However, it may not always be able to
guarantee that what it finds, it gives you
as a solution, is actually the best
possible alternative in every case.
In addition the output of optimization
using the GRG nonlinear method
may depend on the trial values
of the decision variables.
So when optimizing using this method,
run it several times with different trial
values of the decision variables to see if
you can improve the objective
function value.
Okay, the last stop before optimizing.
Let's go to Options, and
make sure that the Ignore Exchange
Constraints is unchecked.
This way, we're really making
sure that the solver will
not try to produce something
like 54.6 scooters.
We're ready to find
the best production plan.
Let's click solve button, and
make sure that solver found is solution is
displayed in the dialogue that appears.
And it does.
Let's click okay and
look at the spreadsheet.
Solver recommends producing
840 unit of razor scooters and
450 of Navajo scooters,
if Zooter wants to maximize it's profit
given the resources the company has.
The corresponding profit value is 100 and
$98,000.
Before we leave Excel,
a few words about solver messages.
This time the solver came up with
the message, solver found a solution.
This is the message we want to see.
I would like to mention two other
messages that we do not want to see.
Suppose that we made a mistake
in setting up our model and
forgot to include one or
more important constraints.
Let's go to our solver dialogue and
wipe out all of our constraints,
and then try to optimize
our production plan.
So we go here.
I'm going to say delete, and
we say delete, so we have no constraints.
Of course, that's silly, but
let's try to solve the model and
see what kind of message
the solver comes up with.
Well, the solver comes up with
a huge red explanation sign,
and the message,
objective cell values do not converge.
This means that the profit in
this model can grow to infinity.
When you see a message like that when
trying to optimize your model, please
remember that it most probably indicates
that you forgot an important constraint.
Okay, let's put back our constraints.
So over, add.
This pre-constraints
should be less than three,
the other should be lesser or
equivalent than this three values.
And let's add integer constraints
on our decision variables.
So let's go like this and
click I-N-T, integer.
And we're back.
Let's click solver, just to make
sure that we get everything right.
Here's the optimal solution.
Okay.
Now, let's set a constraint that will
make it impossible for the solver to find
the values of the decision variables
that will satisfy all of
the constraints in the problem.
For example, right now we want
the number of frame manufacturing hours
used by the production and
not exceed 5,610.
Suppose with a constraint that also
requires the number used manufacturing,
frame manufacturing hours
to be at least 6,000.
Of course, these two constraints
cannot be set aside at the same time.
But let's see what the software tells us
when we are trying to solve the model
with this constraint added.
So we're going to solver, and
we're saying, let's add this constraint.
Let's say the number of required
hours of freight manufacturing
should be at least greater or
equal than 6000.
It's an incompatible constraint
with your other constraints,
but let's see what the cell
reaction would be.
We click solve and the solver comes up
with another red exclamation sign and
a message that it could not
find a feasible solution.
In other words, it could not satisfy
all the constraints at the same time.
So when we see one of these messages,
there's something wrong with our model.
Either, in the case of the first message
we are probably missing an important
constraint, given the objective
function we're trying to optimize, or
we have some incompatible constraints
in the case of the second message.
Let's restore our model
to its original state and
solve it one more time to
make sure everything is fine.
Let's delete this spurious constraint.
Let's click unsolved.
And here we go,
we have our optimal solution.
This final spreadsheet with comments
reflecting the formulas we introduced
is posted on our site
under the name Zooter.
Okay, here's a picture of the optimized
spreadsheet with formulas.
We have the best solution,
840 Razors and 450 Navajos and
the best possible profit, $198,000.
Okay, let's rig up some
optimization terms.
A particular combination of decision
variable values is called solution.
A feasible solution is the one
that satisfies all constraints.
And an in-feasible solution is the one
that violates at least one constraint,
no matter which.
The objective function value is
a number that you will obtain
if you plug in decision variable values,
corresponding to a particular
solution into the objective function.
Finally, the optimal solution
is the best feasible solution.
In the Zooter case,
it is 840 Razor scooters,
and 450 Navajo scooters.
It is possible to have more
than one optimal solution, but
in that case, any optimal solution will
produce the same objective function value.
The best one.
In this session, we have used the solver
optimization tool to set up and
solve Zooter optimization problem.
While doing this, we have learned two
approaches that are often useful in
setting up spreadsheet optimization models
in Excel, the use of the sum-product
function and the use of cell anchoring or
absolute cell referencing.
While details of solver operation may be
slightly different in different platforms,
for example Windows versus Mac,
the main features of the optimization
process are pretty much the same.
In particular, we must identify for
the solver the three main components of
an optimization model, decision variables,
the objective function and constraints.
If you an excel for Mac or google sheets,
have a look at two brief videos we created
for you to go over some minor differences,
in how optimization problems
are set up and solved.
The Zooter's problem had two decision
variables and three resource constraints.
Real resource allocation applications may
contain hundreds of thousands of variables
and constraints or more.
Of course, solver will not be able
to handle such large problems.
But commercial optimization software
packages that are powerful enough to deal
with problems of this size will still
operate using decision variables,
objective function and
constraints just like the solver.
The Zooter's problem is
a resource allocation example.
In the next session, we will look at
another popular type of resource problem.
One in which supply must meet demand
across the network of locations.
See you next time.